"I thank you, ma'am, sincerely thank you,"
"your invitation has insured my gratitude for ever, and it would give me such happiness, yes, almost the greatest happiness I am capable of, to be able to accept it. But my mother, my dearest, kindest mother,--I feel the justice of what Elinor has urged, and if she were to be made less happy, less comfortable by our absence--Oh! no, nothing should tempt me to leave her. It should not, must not be a struggle."
"If Elinor is frightened away by her dislike of Mrs. Jennings,"
"at least it need not prevent MY accepting her invitation. I have no such scruples, and I am sure I could put up with every unpleasantness of that kind with very little effort."
"I am NOT going to write to my mother,"
“Has no letter been left here for me since we went out?”
"Are you quite sure of it?"
"How very odd!"
"That is true,"
"I had not thought of that. This weather will keep many sportsmen in the country."
"It is charming weather for THEM indeed,"
"How much they must enjoy it! But"
"it cannot be expected to last long. At this time of the year, and after such a series of rain, we shall certainly have very little more of it. Frosts will soon set in, and in all probability with severity. In another day or two perhaps; this extreme mildness can hardly last longer--nay, perhaps it may freeze tonight!"
"Don't you find it colder than it was in the morning, Elinor? There seems to me a very decided difference. I can hardly keep my hands warm even in my muff. It was not so yesterday, I think. The clouds seem parting too, the sun will be out in a moment, and we shall have a clear afternoon."
"Good God!"
"he has been here while we were out."
"Depend upon it, he will call again tomorrow."
"For me!"
"It is indeed for Mrs. Jennings; how provoking!"
"Yes, a little--not much."
"Nay, Elinor, this reproach from YOU--you who have confidence in no one!"
"Invited!"
"Good heavens!"
"he is there--he is there--Oh! why does he not look at me? why cannot I speak to him?"
"Good God! Willoughby, what is the meaning of this? Have you not received my letters? Will you not shake hands with me?"
"But have you not received my notes?"
"Here is some mistake I am sure--some dreadful mistake. What can be the meaning of it? Tell me, Willoughby; for heaven's sake tell me, what is the matter?"
"Go to him, Elinor,"
"and force him to come to me. Tell him I must see him again--must speak to him instantly.-- I cannot rest--I shall not have a moment's peace till this is explained--some dreadful misapprehension or other.-- Oh go to him this moment."
"No, Elinor,"
"ask nothing; you will soon know all."
"Poor Elinor! how unhappy I make you!"
"Oh! Elinor, I am miserable, indeed,"
"I cannot, I cannot,"
"leave me, leave me, if I distress you; leave me, hate me, forget me! but do not torture me so. Oh! how easy for those, who have no sorrow of their own to talk of exertion! Happy, happy Elinor, YOU cannot have an idea of what I suffer."
"Forgive me, forgive me,"
"I know you feel for me; I know what a heart you have; but yet you are--you must be happy; Edward loves you--what, oh what, can do away such happiness as that?"
"No, no, no,"
"he loves you, and only you. You CAN have no grief."
"And you will never see me otherwise. Mine is a misery which nothing can do away."
"Engagement!"
"there has been no engagement."
"No, he is not so unworthy as you believe him. He has broken no faith with me."
"Yes--no--never absolutely. It was every day implied, but never professedly declared. Sometimes I thought it had been--but it never was."
"Yes--could that be wrong after all that had passed?-- But I cannot talk."
"I felt myself,"
"to be as solemnly engaged to him, as if the strictest legal covenant had bound us to each other."
"He DID feel the same, Elinor--for weeks and weeks he felt it. I know he did. Whatever may have changed him now, (and nothing but the blackest art employed against me can have done it), I was once as dear to him as my own soul could wish. This lock of hair, which now he can so readily give up, was begged of me with the most earnest supplication. Had you seen his look, his manner, had you heard his voice at that moment! Have you forgot the last evening of our being together at Barton? The morning that we parted too! When he told me that it might be many weeks before we met again--his distress--can I ever forget his distress?"
"Elinor, I have been cruelly used; but not by Willoughby."
"By all the world, rather than by his own heart. I could rather believe every creature of my acquaintance leagued together to ruin me in his opinion, than believe his nature capable of such cruelty. This woman of whom he writes--whoever she be--or any one, in short, but your own dear self, mama, and Edward, may have been so barbarous to bely me. Beyond you three, is there a creature in the world whom I would not rather suspect of evil than Willoughby, whose heart I know so well?"
"No, no,"
"misery such as mine has no pride. I care not who knows that I am wretched. The triumph of seeing me so may be open to all the world. Elinor, Elinor, they who suffer little may be proud and independent as they like--may resist insult, or return mortification--but I cannot. I must feel--I must be wretched--and they are welcome to enjoy the consciousness of it that can."
"I would do more than for my own. But to appear happy when I am so miserable--Oh! who can require it?"
"It is too much! Oh, Willoughby, Willoughby, could this be yours! Cruel, cruel--nothing can acquit you. Elinor, nothing can. Whatever he might have heard against me--ought he not to have suspended his belief? ought he not to have told me of it, to have given me the power of clearing myself? 'The lock of hair, (repeating it from the letter,) which you so obligingly bestowed on me'--That is unpardonable. Willoughby, where was your heart when you wrote those words? Oh, barbarously insolent!--Elinor, can he be justified?"
"And yet this woman--who knows what her art may have been?--how long it may have been premeditated, and how deeply contrived by her!--Who is she?--Who can she be?--Whom did I ever hear him talk of as young and attractive among his female acquaintance?--Oh! no one, no one--he talked to me only of myself."
"Elinor, I must go home. I must go and comfort mama. Can not we be gone to-morrow?"
"Yes, why should I stay here? I came only for Willoughby's sake--and now who cares for me? Who regards me?"
"Well then, another day or two, perhaps; but I cannot stay here long, I cannot stay to endure the questions and remarks of all these people. The Middletons and Palmers--how am I to bear their pity? The pity of such a woman as Lady Middleton! Oh, what would HE say to that!"
"You had better leave me,"
"It is Colonel Brandon!"
"I will not trust to THAT,"
"A man who has nothing to do with his own time has no conscience in his intrusion on that of others."
"This is admiration of a very particular kind!--what is Miss Morton to us?--who knows, or who cares, for her?--it is Elinor of whom WE think and speak."
"Dear, dear Elinor, don't mind them. Don't let them make YOU unhappy."
"Dear Edward!"
"this is a moment of great happiness!--This would almost make amends for every thing!"
"Oh, don't think of me!"
"don't think of MY health. Elinor is well, you see. That must be enough for us both."
"Not at all. I expected much pleasure in it, but I have found none. The sight of you, Edward, is the only comfort it has afforded; and thank Heaven! you are what you always were!"
"I think, Elinor,"
"we must employ Edward to take care of us in our return to Barton. In a week or two, I suppose, we shall be going; and, I trust, Edward will not be very unwilling to accept the charge."
"We spent such a day, Edward, in Harley Street yesterday! So dull, so wretchedly dull!--But I have much to say to you on that head, which cannot be said now."
"But why were you not there, Edward?--Why did you not come?"
"Engaged! But what was that, when such friends were to be met?"
"Not so, indeed; for, seriously speaking, I am very sure that conscience only kept Edward from Harley Street. And I really believe he HAS the most delicate conscience in the world; the most scrupulous in performing every engagement, however minute, and however it may make against his interest or pleasure. He is the most fearful of giving pain, of wounding expectation, and the most incapable of being selfish, of any body I ever saw. Edward, it is so, and I will say it. What! are you never to hear yourself praised!--Then you must be no friend of mine; for those who will accept of my love and esteem, must submit to my open commendation."
"Going so soon!"
"my dear Edward, this must not be."
"What can bring her here so often?"
"Could not she see that we wanted her gone!--how teazing to Edward!"
"You know, Elinor, that this is a kind of talking which I cannot bear. If you only hope to have your assertion contradicted, as I must suppose to be the case, you ought to recollect that I am the last person in the world to do it. I cannot descend to be tricked out of assurances, that are not really wanted."